Add ApolloPagination to the DocC generation project (#262)
apollographql/apollo-ios-dev: docs/source/pagination/custom-types.mdx

---
title: Using custom response models
---

The `GraphQLQueryPager` supports not only returning collections of a query's `Data` type, but also custom response types. The custom response types can either be a collection or a single object. This is useful when you want to transform the raw response into custom models for consumption in your application.

## Transforming existing responses types

> The `GraphQLQueryPager` class conforms to the `Publisher` protocol, and provides a `map` method that allows you to transform the raw response into a custom response type. When used this way, the `GraphQLQueryPager` will operate over generated `Data` types, but allow each `Data` type to betransformed into a custom response type. This is especially useful when you want to reuse a single pager in multiple places, transforming the raw data into view models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `GraphQLQueryPager` class conforms to the `Publisher` protocol, and provides a `map` method that allows you to transform the raw response into a custom response type. When used this way, the `GraphQLQueryPager` will operate over generated `Data` types, but allow each `Data` type to be transformed into a custom response type. This is especially useful when you want to reuse a single pager in multiple places, transforming the raw data into view models.
```

        let pages = paginationOutput.previousPages + [paginationOutput.initialPage] + paginationOutput.nextPages
        let people = pages.flatMap { page in
            data.values.nodes.map { Person(id: $0.id, name: $0.name) }
        }
        return Result<[Person], Error>.success(people)
    case .failure(let error):
        return .failure(error)
    }
}.sink { result in
    // NOTE: This is not guaranteed to run on the main thread. Dispatch to the main thread if necessary.
    switch result {
    case .success(let people):
        // Handle the people
    case .failure(let error):
        // Handle the error
    }
}
```

## Creating `GraphQLQueryPager` that returns custom response types

The `GraphQLQueryPager` class can also be initialized with a custom type in mind. When used this way, the `GraphQLQueryPager` will operate over the custom response type, and not the raw `Data` type. This is useful when you want to create a pager that returns a custom response type, and you don't want to transform the raw response into a custom response type.

We provide a convenience method for transforming collection types in this manner. 

> In this example, we take a `GraphQLQueryPager` that returns a `Result<PaginationOutput<MyQuery.Data, MyQuery.Data>>`, and transform the raw response into a custom response type of `Result<([Person], UpdateSource), Error>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we create a `GraphQLQueryPager` that  transform the raw response into a custom response type of `Result<([Person], UpdateSource), Error>`. The `transform` closure will be called on the data from each paginated query and the resulting arrays will be concatenated together.
```

```swift
let initialQuery = MyQuery(first: 10, after: nil)
let pager = GraphQLQueryPager.makeQueryPager(
    client: client,
    initialQuery: initialQuery,
    pageResolver: { page, paginationDirection in
        // As we only want to support forward pagination, we can return `nil` for reverse pagination
        switch paginationDirection {
        case .next:
            return MyQuery(first: 10, after: page.endCursor ?? .none)
        case .previous:
            return nil
        }
    },
    extractPageInfo: { data in
        CursorBasedPagination.Forward(
            hasNext: data.values.pageInfo.hasNextPage ?? false,
            endCursor: data.values.pageInfo.endCursor
        )
    },
    transform: { data in
        data.values.nodes.compactMap { node in
            Person(id: node.id, name: node.name)
        }
    }
)
```

> This supports single object types as well, such as a `Result<(MyResponseModel, UpdateSource), Error>`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can also return a single model type, such as a `Result<(MyResponseModel, UpdateSource), Error>`. To do this, we use a `transform` closure with three parameters, `previousPages, initialPage, nextPages`:
```
